Optional Chaining.
So I'll set up an example, and we'll talk
about why we might use optional chaining.
Let me uncomment this real quick.
So I have a little
obligatory payment example,
where we have a couple
different objects here.
And what I've done here, I have made an
effort to create a highly nested object.
So, starting from the bottom,
we have a response that could
contain a single customer or
an array of customers.
And if we go one step up,
we can see, all right,
customers have a lastInvoice and
an array of invoices.
Presumably if they have no invoices,
lastInvoice has no meaning,
shouldn't be populated.
invoices have multiple payments, right?
You can make a deposit, pay for half of
the invoice, and you could pay the rest.
And now same deal here,
lastPayment, which like,
if you haven't made any payments yet,
clearly you don't have a last payment yet.
And then a payment is sort of
all the way at the bottom or
all the way most nested
into the JSON object.
It just has three properties on it.
So, yeah, the important thing is
just to know this contains this,
contains this, contains this.
So let's look at how we would
write some code to deal with this.
So this is one way of writing code.
This is using just type guards, where
we're using, at three steps along the way,
destructured assignment to sort of
pluck off a const variable that
represents customer,
lastInvoice, lastPayment, right?
And then once we check to make sure that
customer is there, lastInvoice is there,
lastPayment is there,
then we can finally return the amount.
So what we'll end up
returning here is undefined,
from the outer function we'll
return undefined or a number.
Let's see if that's true.
There it is, number or undefined.
You could argue we could return null,
but given what I just talked about,
it would look the same, similar.
So, but
this is a lot of noise here, right?
There's a lot of code.
Here's how you could write
it using optional chaining.
It's similar to the non-null
assertion operator,
which was exclamation point dot,
and this is question mark dot.
And look how we can just drill from data
to customer to lastInvoice, lastPayment,
amount.
If at any of these steps something
is found to be undefined or null,
the entire expression will
just evaluate to undefined.
So this does not throw,
this just evaluates to undefined if
any of these things are undefined.
And so we can still return
the same thing from our function,
but look how much easier
this code is to read.
And we know what's gonna happen
at each step of the way.
This is much safer.
This one I would use in
production code that runs.
It's different from the non-null assertion
operator in that it's not gonna just
randomly throw at a particular place,
it's kinda like uncontrolled failure.
Here, we're evaluating out to exactly
the same thing we'd evaluate out to here.
That's part of why I didn't put null at
each of these returns cuz I wanted it to
match what you would get here.
These two implementations are equivalent,
but look how much easier it is to read.
So this is a great one to use.
Also, I use this in tests, right?
If you wanna drill all the way down to
a particular property and it's not there,
it's undefined.
It's another way of sort of
drilling into a nested object.
Your choice depends on whether you wanna
throw in the event of the failure or
evaluate to undefined.
Last topic, Nullish Coalescing.
So we have another example here.
Let's say we have a video
player that we're building.
And we want to set the volume
of a video player,
and the volume could be 0,
which represents mute.
And then we have steps up
by 25% all the way to 100.
And we have a function here that
initializes the video player.
And we'd say, if the type of the volume
is undefined, then we set it to 50.
Let's say that that's the default volume.
Otherwise we return
the config volume here.
If we wanted to replace this,
let's say that this ternary operator
is getting a little unwieldy.
So this code is correct as it stands,
but somebody comes along and they're
not thinking about this carefully, and
they're like, you know what I could do,
is I've seen a pattern all over
the place that looks like this.
I'll just do that, right?
This is a pattern I've
seen all over the place.
It's good for setting defaults,
who's seen something like this before?
All right, we have a problem though.
Look what happened to our
allowed values for vol.
0 has disappeared.
This kind of treatment for
using a value if it exists and
falling back to a default.
You're doing a truthy-falsy check here.
And in this case, there is a value here
that will fail the truthy-falsy check,
but it's a valid thing, right?
What this would leave you with
is every time a user comes back,
they have a preset volume, right?
Every time if they muted it,
they'd come back and they're back to 50.
So we don't want that,
we can just change this to this,
question marks,
question mark, question mark.
This is not a truthy-falsy check.
This is a check for null or undefined.
You look at vol,
there's our 0 back where it should be.
I would say, anytime you see this,
you see pipe pipe, think.
Think carefully, but it's usually safe to
switch it to question mark, question mark.
Keep in mind, it's different behavior.
And so you'll have to think carefully
about what happened to the zeros,
what happened to the empty strings,
the nulls?
But for new code that you're writing,
this is a lot safer, right?
Because it's easy to think about truthy,
falsy checks as sort of present or
not present, but remember,
Boolean false, 0, empty string.
They all are falsy, and
this handles falsy values in a way
that's a little bit more appropriate.
Yeah, I'm not gonna say just wholesale
throughout your code, find double pipe and
replace it, cuz somewhere someone
might be depending on that behavior,
the existing behavior.
But I tend to write all my code
like this now, where you can really
disambiguate between empty and
present instead of truthy and falsy.
>> That is available just in
null JavaScript as well, right?
>> It is.
It is, right?
It's a JavaScript feature.
TypeScript handles the narrowing properly.
But it's still an important thing for
working with null values, nullish values.
That's a good question.
In fact, optional chaining is
also part of regular JavaScript.
The non-null assertion operator,
I think that's only TypeScript.
I'd have to check, right, this bang.
>> I think so.
>> Did I lose?
I lost my other example,
I've messed with this too much.
But bang dot, that's only TypeScript.
And this definite assignment
operator is also only TypeScript.